Hello everyone and welcome to part five control flow control flow is a fundamental aspect of any full
programming language and it allows us to execute code only if a certain situation or condition arises
and we can use it in combination of logical and comparison operators in case this is your first time
programming we're going to briefly go over the main concepts of control flow such as if statements l
statements and if statements in this lecture.
If you've already programmed in another language before you may actually find that more useful just
to reference the notes for this lecture to get the javascript syntax since a lot of these concepts are
the same across programming languages.
The only thing that's different is the actual syntax.
So let's continue on and actually discuss control flow.
So usually we have control flow.
You're going to initiate some sort of condition check that returns a boolean which is either true or
false.
And then based off those results you use control flow to execute a specific block of code.
Let's see the first basic example which is an if statement.
So in this statement the general syntax looks like this.
You say if and then some condition and that condition right there is usually some sort of comparison
operator or you're checking for some sort of equality.
So we say if this condition is true we execute some code that's inside those curly brackets.
So the syntax is if imprint sees the condition check and then curly brackets you're going to execute
some sort of code.
Then there's the if else statement.
And the main logic behind this is if some condition is true you execute some code that very first line
there else meaning if that condition was not true you execute some other code.
So here we're just checking if a condition is true.
We execute some code.
If it doesn't happen to be true than the else statement occurs and we execute some other code and then
we have the if else if else statements.
So if you want to check for multiple conditions not just one you can add an ELSE IF statement.
So the syntax looks like this.
We say if you check for some condition number one you execute some code then you can have an else if
to check for another possible condition.
And then you see some other code if condition want condition to.
Don't bring up true.
So neither of those conditions happened to be true.
Then finally the else block executes some backup code OK.
Let's actually code through some examples.
I was just general syntax in a very high level overview but I think if we could through some examples
I'll make it a lot clear.
I'm going to open up my editor in my browser now.
All right so here you have an html file open and javascript file open there both blank in my browser
is connected right now to the h l file.
So let's actually fill in the sage T.M. file and then also connected to the script.
So I'm going to write scripts.
I can get rid of that and just say the source is my script doc.
Yes.
OK.
And let's make sure this is working by adding some sort of alert here that says hello.
Save this I'll refresh my page and I get the alert.
Hello.
Great.
So we're connected to the job script.
That way if I want to run more than one line of javascript code all I have to do is type it to the database
file and then refresh my browser over here.
And let's actually open up the console here as well so I won't say inspect it the console and now I
can see output so to begin seeing an if statement in action.
We're going to start by creating two variables.
First we'll create hot and we'll say it's false and then create another variable called Temp.
And I will say it's equal to 60 and we're going to do it just apply some very simple logic code so we
say if some condition is true then we execute code inside of those curly brackets.
So for example we have these two variables hot contemp and imagine that hot starts off as false and
temperature or temp is some number in degrees.
And if the temp is greater than 80 we want to assign hot physical to true.
So if it's more than 80 degrees I'm going to say that it hot is not true.
So what does this look like.
Well I can say if I could actually enter here and Adam will automatically fill in that sort of syntax
scaffolding.
And the most basic if statement is just if true.
So let's run this one first and don't say if true I will log Iran refresh the page here and it says
Iran.
So that's the very most basic if statement if true.
And then this always runs because it will always be true.
Let's show you something a little more realistic using those two variables.
I'll say if the temperature is greater than 80 logged temp is greater than 80.
We'll save that refresher page and we actually don't get any output which makes sense because remember
temperature is 60 but now let's do this.
If temperature is greater than 80 I will say hot is equal to true.
And the secondly the first time we show this.
But this is how you can reassign a variable in Javascript.
So right now I initiated it with the V.A. our call.
So this is for initialising that variable.
But if I just want to reassign it I have to make sure it's reassigned to the same data type here.
So it's also a boolean.
But in this case I'm reassigning it to true and then I'm going to log out.
So let's see what happens if I refresh this page I get false.
So what actually happened here will have my variable is equal to false temperature 60.
I said if the temperature is greater than 80 re-assign hot to be true.
And then finally output hot since temperature was not greater than 80.
This re-assignment never occurred.
Meaning hot is always going to stay false.
Now let's try this again but set the temperature to be higher than 80 100.
So take a moment and think what we'll see when actually refreshes page will it be false or true.
To refresh and it's true.
Which makes sense because the temperature is now 100.
Meaning if the temperature is greater than 80 100 greater than 80 re-assign hot to be equal to true
and then log whatever hot currently is and hot was reassigned to true.
And that's the very basics of an IF statement.
Now let's imagine that we want to execute another block that occurs if the if statement is false.
Well in that case we can use an L statement to do this let's add that in.
So I'm going to say just console log up here.
Console log on outside.
So if the temperature is greater than 80 I'm going to say it's hot outside else and you can see that
Adams helped me out here so I'll just take to help else I will log.
It's not very hot today and you might be wondering hey why doesn't else actually have this parentheses
check here.
And the reason is because else doesn't need to check for any specific condition.
You remember else is going to occur only if all the conditions above it never were activated they were
never true.
OK.
So let's try this again.
I'm going to delete this line right here and I'm going to set temperature equal to 100.
So let's think what's going to log if I set temperature equal to 100 or refreshed this page and it says
it's hot outside.
So that makes sense if the temperature is greater than 80 log it's hot outside.
Now let's set the temperature to be 50 degrees.
What do we think is going to happen when I refreshed.
Page.
It's not very hot today.
That makes sense because this if statement was never triggered as true meaning this statement is going
to occur.
It's not very hot today.
That's the basics of it.
If else statement.
OK so we saw how if statements work how if else statements work.
Now let's see how else if statements work.
So again if we want to check more conditions in just one single condition and its opposite we can add
ELSE IF statements to check for multiple specific conditions.
And the way it looks is like this and you can see that Adam text editor will actually help us out and
we see else if all hit enter and it makes sense that there's Prince he's here now because I want to
check if another certain condition is true.
So let's actually check for multiple temperature changes.
So right now if the temperature is greater than 80 degrees I say it's hot outside.
Now let's imagine that it's just pretty average or nice outside.
So the temperature is less than or equal to 80 and the temperature is greater than or equal to 50 degrees.
So somewhere in between 50 and 80 I'll say average temp outside.
Now let's check for another condition.
Again we'll call it else if.
And inside the Sprint CS I'll put in another condition something like temperature less than 50 and temperature
greater than or equal to 32 degrees alog that it's pretty cold out.
And then finally I'm going to one else statement and for the sell statement I'm going to say it is very
cold out.
And the reason for that is because I know the else statement is only going to occur if the temperature
is not greater than 80.
It's not in between 1850 and it's not in between 32 and 50 meaning statements only going to occur when
the temperature is less than 32 degrees.
So let's try this out and make sure we got everything right.
Going to refresh my page here.
Member are starting temperatures 50 degrees.
So if I refresh this I would expect it to say average temp outside because we fall right here.
Temperatures equal to 50 let's make average temp outside go again with something like 70 degrees.
Save this refresh and there it is again.
Average temperature outside.
Let's make it say it's pretty cold out so I'll say it's 40 degrees outside refresh and it says it's
pretty cold out.
And let's make it something like 10 degrees by refresh this page then it says it is very cold out meaning
none of these conditions were actually activated.
So the statement was activated.
OK let's do one final example of comparison operators.
So I will delete all this.
And let's start with kind of a store example.
So make a variable called and set it equal to 10 flips variable called him set it to 10 and then I'll
create another variable called cheese and said it's equal to 10
and we'll discuss semi-colons later on.
You don't actually need those there so don't worry about having semi-colons everywhere right now.
But let's say we want to report back to headquarters what are ham and cheese sales where we run a little
store that sells ham and cheese.
So I'm going to make my variable report equal to a string that's just blank right now.
And then I'll start off with my first statement and I will say if the sales of him is greater than 10
greater than or equal to 10 and cheese is greater than or equal to 10 I'm going to say my report is
equal to strong sales of both ham and cheese.
Then let's have an ELSE IF statement and the statement is going to say.
Else if ham is equal to zero and cheese is equal to zero My report is going to be equal to nothing sold.
And let's keep things simple with an L statement and I will say report is equal to.
We had some sales of items and you can keep adding elses statements for things like if you only sold
ham or you only sold cheese that day what would it look like.
But at the end of this outside of these statements I'm going to say log or cancel that log and I will
log my report.
So it's refreshing and see what we get.
So it says Strong sales of both ham and cheese that makes sense.
Ham and cheese are both 10 right now let's say Ham is one will refresh this page.
We had some sales of items that make sense.
Let's change it so that nothing was sold is equal to zero and cheeses equal to zero.
Refresh our page and it says nothing sold.
OK great.
Hopefully now you have a general understanding of if statements if else statements and if statements
in javascript.
Coming up next we're going to begin discussing loops with the while loop.
Thanks everyone and I'll see you at the next lecture.